---
documentclass: report
classoption: 14pt, letterpaper
output:
  pdf_document:
    # toc: true
    highlight: zenburn
    latex_engine: lualatex
    pandoc_args: ["--pdf-engine-opt=-shell-escape"]
    includes:
      in_header: ./include/preamble.tex
      before_body: ./include/before_body.tex
print_background: true
puppeteer:
  timeout: 1000
---

# MATH 541 L1 Notes

We will cover basics of **groups**, **rings**, and **modules**.

There are all **sets** with additional structures.

**Example** $\mathbb{R}$ is a ring (a field). A vector space over $\mathbb{R}$ is a module.

## Recap of Sets

$A, B$ are sets, $f: A \to B$ is a function.

**Definition** $f$ is an **injection** if $f(a) = f(b) \implies a = b$. 

**Non-example** $f: \mathbb{R} \to \mathbb{R}, x \mapsto x^2$ is not an injection. $f(2) = f(-2), 2 \neq -2$ 

**Definition** $f$ is a **surjection** if $\forall b \in B, \exists a \in A, \text{s.t. } f(a) = b$

**Definition** $f$ is a **bijection** if $f$ is both a **surjection** and an **injection**. 
$f$ is bijective $\iff$ $f$ has an unique inverse function $f^{-1}$. 
$$
f^{-1}(f(a)) = a \; \forall a \in A, \quad f(f^{-1}(b)) = b \; \forall b \in B
$$

### Products of Sets

$A, B$ are sets, $A \times B$ is the set of all ordered pairs $(a, b)$ where $a \in A, b \in B$. $A \times B = \{(a, b) | a \in A, b \in B\}$

**Example** $\mathbb{R}^{2} = \mathbb{R} \times \mathbb{R}$ 

## Binary Operation

**Binary Operation** on a set $X$ is a function $*$
$$
*: X \times X \to X, (x, y) \mapsto  x + y
$$

**Example** $X = \mathbb{Z}$, $* = +$ is a binary operation on $\mathbb{R}$, $3 + 5 = 8$

Consider the set $[n] = \{1, 2, \cdots, n \}$, 
$$
\text{Aut}([n]) = \{f:[n] \to [n] | f \text{ is bijective}\}
$$ 

**Example** $n = 3$, $f = (2, 1, 3) = (1, 3, 2)$ (Cycle Representation), can form $f \circ g, [n] \xrightarrow{g} [n] \xrightarrow{f} [n]$
$$
\begin{aligned}
f \circ g(1) &= f(g(1)) = f(1) = 3 \\
f \circ g(2) &= f(g(2)) = f(3) = 2 \\
f \circ g(3) &= f(g(3)) = f(2) = 1 \\
f \circ g &= (3, 1) = (1, 3)
\end{aligned}
$$

$(\text{Aut}[n], \circ)$ forms a group.

## Group

A group $G$ is a **set** equipped with a binary operation $*$ such that:

- Associative: $(a * b) * c = a * (b * c), \; \forall a, b, c \in G$
- Identity: $\exists e \in G, \; e * a = a * e = a, \; \forall a \in G$
- Inverse: $\forall a \in G, \; \exists a^{-1} \in G, \; a * a^{-1} = a^{-1} * a = e$

Check $(\text{Aut}[n], \circ)$ is a group.

- Associative: $(f \circ g) \circ h = f \circ (g \circ h)$. This is an equality of functions. $[n] \to [n]$
i.e. $\forall x \in [n], (f \circ g) \circ h(x) = f \circ (g \circ h) (x) = f(g(h(x)))$
- Identity: $\exists e \in \text{Aut}[n], \; e \circ f = f \circ e = f$. i.e $\text{id}_{[n]}(x) = x, \forall x \in [n]$
(The permutation that does nothing)
- Inverse: $f \in \text{Aut}([n])$ is bijective, $\forall f \in \text{Aut}[n], \; \exists f^{-1} \in \text{Aut}[n], \; f \circ f^{-1} = f^{-1} \circ f = \text{id}_{[n]}$. 


**Exercise** Compute $(1, 2, 3) \circ (2, 3)$ and $(2, 3) \circ (1, 2, 3)$
$(1, 2, 3) \circ (2, 3) = (2, 1, 3)$
$(2, 3) \circ (1, 2, 3) = (1, 3)$

In general, for a group $(G, *)$, $a * b \neq b*a$ (not necessarily)
If $a*b = b*a, \forall a, b \in G$, then $G$ is called **abelian**, or **commutative**.

**Example** $(\mathbb{Z}, +)$ is an abelian group. 
$(\mathbb{Z}, *)$ is **NOT** a group! (Inverse of $0$ does not exist)
$({\pm 1}, \times )$ is an abelian group. 
$M_{n\times n} = \{n \times n \text{ matrices / } \mathbb{R}\}$ $(M_{n \times n}, + )$ is an abelian group. 
$M^{\times }_{n\times n} = \{A \in M_{n\times n} | \operatorname{det}(A) \neq 0\}$. Then $(M^{\times }_{n\times n}, \times )$ is a group. $\mathbb{R}^{n} \to \mathbb{R}^{n}$ usually not commutative.
